Materials Research

Much has been said surrounding electric power sources and better solutions for the future. It is essential that we push into a post lithium-ion world and my preliminary research intent is to show why and how we can make this critical transition. For those unfamiliar, many of the devices we use on a day-to-day basis are powered by lithium-ion batteries. This ranges from cellular devices and mobile technologies to electronic vehicles (EV). The development of lithium-ion was a significant improvement over prior batteries yet still not the breakthrough we need. This article outlines my current thoughts on research in the area.

There is no shortage of problems surrounding lithium-ion batteries and these flaws are well known within the engineering field. The long and short of it is, we want more efficient, more sustainable, more stable, low-cost alternatives. We have all noticed significant improvements in phones, computers, mobile electronics, etc. due to advancements in the underlying microchips/microprocessors. Nearly every aspect of computing has advanced rapidly while batteries have not kept up. New conversations are emerging surrounding the cost and life span of Electric Vehicle batteries. Green initiatives and lawsuits illuminate the child mining practices and supply issues [Cobalt] that provide an even larger concern for many. Closer to home is the spontaneous combustion of cell phones and cars. This is the result of a flammable electrolyte that alternatives may not require. This [combustion] can be seen in countless online videos showing both items erupting into flames. A well-spoken explanation, “Safety focused modeling of lithium-ion batteries: A review, Journal of Power Sources, defined this issue as “characterization of the thermal runaway hazard and their relating triggering events.” (Abada et al.) Even one of these issues is enough to warrant further exploration of the power source replacement. 

My initial bias was leaning in the direction of Elon Musk’s [Tesla/SpaceX] acquisition of lithium-iron production method. In his article Tim Mullaney writes, “As Tesla plans next-generation electric vehicle batteries, focus is turning to lithium iron, not the lithium ion that has been the fundamental chemical engineering science powering EVs to date” (Mullaney). I now believe my initial thinking to be too simplistic. This is a singular solution that is not guaranteed nor likely a best solution. I do believe this will come to pass [lithium-iron] however, I believe time will reveal a more desirable option. As much as I want to proclaim the exact formula for the most efficient battery replacement, I have a significant amount of learning to do. In looking at the current work in the field, it is clear that amazing minds are hard at work on this. Rather, the purpose of this article is to propose the use of a systematic alternative method and outline some of the methods that I see as useful. These methods could determine the material used in future batteries research, different thermal and electric properties, etc. 

My belief is that utilizing machine learning and a systematic mathematical approach applied to all known materials, one could arrive at a list of all replacement candidates and methodologies. One source of data describes itself as, “Harnessing the power of supercomputing and state-of-the-art methods, the Materials Project provides open web-based access to computed information on known and predicted materials as well as powerful analysis tools to inspire and design novel materials.” (Thematerialsproject.org). This is my preferred source of large data on the topic. Meanwhile, aflow.org suggests an elegant method for implementation. The article “Aflow.org: A web ecosystem of databases, software and tools” explains, “To enable materials databases supporting computational and experimental research, it is critical to develop platforms that both facilitate access to the data and provide the tools used to generate/analyze it — all while considering the diversity of users’ experience levels and usage needs.” (Esters et al.) 

Using available data, known formulas, and machine learning, it seems like we could stack rank materials. The site provides access to extremely organized, descriptive and plentiful data. This would lead me to believe my next steps to joining the conversation might be to look closely at mathematical and chemical formulas and how they relate to the data to try and establish the most interesting concepts.

The materials could then be evaluated using machine learning to expedite aspects of the process. With machine learning, the outputs are as limitless as the provided data. Shen and colleagues speak to the vastness, in their article “A charge-density-based general cation insertion algorithm for generating new Li-ion cathode materials.” Shen et al. states, “These candidate intercalation host materials cover 6862 distinct combinations of atomic species, which we call chemical systems,” (Shen et al.) while referencing the data obtained from the site [materialsproject.org]. 

This [process] could reduce if not eliminate the need for physical research as well as pave the way for more advanced machine learning methodologies in the future. Similar methods could be adapted for non-battery materials in lateral fields of study if/when progress is satisfactory. Mathematical calculations would vary based on intended material purpose as well as the evaluation criteria. Automation is the key to all of this. It is unclear what steps have been taken by major manufacturers. Either way, using open-source ideas and resources we can establish a solid starting point for my entrance to the conversation as well as an occupiable space for my studies. 

With an open-source community and similar projects/concepts already under way, my idea seems approachable and obtainable. This will serve as a springboard to reach like-minded individuals already in this space. A variant of this style of research can be seen here: “A charge-density-based general cation insertion algorithm for generating new Li-ion cathode materials.” Shen and colleagues have already successfully completed similar tasks (their research is just one piece of added information) and speak to the vastness of possibilities. With more time, automation, and ideas there is no doubt the scope will be multiplicative of current endeavors.

New materials like graphene have recently emerged offering new avenues to solutions. The knowledge of known materials is in a constant state of evolution and may hold the answer to old questions. These materials [Graphene and others] will have us looking even closer than ever at the new materials, the old materials, and the way they coexist. Like most new things, availability, and costs present challenges. Digital research methods are invaluable when access [to the researched material] is limited. In these evolving times, the future will surely hold countless more materials and even more ways for people to see them. 

The issues surrounding lithium-ion indicate a need for significant changes. We started this article on a quest for a path beyond the battery we know and a better process to guide the way. Our path beyond lithium-ion is to capitalize on the technologies that thrive upon repetitious tasks, where the workload is greatest. The key is investing human energy in facilitating the communication of technologies, rather than the repetitious task itself. There cannot be an answer to the question [what is the best solution?] without a comprehensive and complete evaluation. With machine learning at our fingertips, the answer lies in the technologies that we already possess and our willingness to pursue them. In this approach, we can utilize the tools that exist today to meet the needs of tomorrow and finally find the answers we have been seeking for decades.

Works Cited
S. Abada, G. Marlair, A. Lecocq, M. Petit, V. Sauvant-Moynot, F. Huet, Safety focused modeling of lithium-ion batteries: A review, Journal of Power Sources, Volume 306, 2016, Pages 178-192, ISSN 0378-7753, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2015.11.100.

Mullaney, Tim. “Tesla and the science behind the next-generation, lower-cost, ‘million-mile’ electric-car battery” CNBC, 30 Jun. 2020 https://www.cnbc.com/2020/06/30/tesla-and-the-science-of-low-cost-next-gen-ev-million-mile-battery.html. Accessed 16 Nov. 2022.

A. Jain, S. Ping Ong, G. Hautier, W. Chen, W. D. Richards, S. Dacek, S. Cholia, D. Gunter, D. Skinner, G. Ceder, and K. Persson, "Commentary: The Materials Project: A materials genome approach to accelerating materials innovation", APL Materials 1, 011002 (2013) https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4812323

M. Esters, C. Oses, S. Divilov, H. Eckert, R. Friedrich, D. Hicks, M. Mehl, F. Rose, A. Smolyanyuk, A. Calzolari, X. Campilongo, C. Toher, S. Curtarolo, aflow.org: A web ecosystem of databases, software and tools, Computational Materials Science, Volume 216, 2023, 111808, ISSN 0927-0256, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.commatsci.2022.111808. 

JX. Shen, M. Horton & K.A. Persson A charge-density-based general cation insertion algorithm for generating new Li-ion cathode materials. npj Comput Mater 6, 161 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-020-00422-3
